DeepSEA
Learns a regulatory sequence code (features?) from large-scale chromatin profiling data (DNAseq?)
Enables prediction of variants with single-nucleotide sensitivity
Improve prioritization of functional variants including eQTL and disease-associated variants
Motifs are less powerful than evolutionary features (phyloP) and chromatin annotation (?)
3 innovations: integrating sequence information from a wide context, learning code at multiple spatial scales (convolution), multitask joint learning of diverse chromatin factors (diff objectives) sharing predictive features.
ENCODE: 690 TF binding profiles for 160 TFs, 125 DHS profiles, 104 histone-mark profiles. So 919 total feature/cell-type combinations. Last layer scales predictions for each feature to [0,1].
521 Mbp of genome. Wider sequence context of 1000 bp (receptive field)
Multitask model: share learned predictive sequence features (intermediate features) across all chromatin profile predictors (objectives).
Predict on holdout AUC .958, beating gkm-SVM (AUC .896)
In silico saturated mutagenesis (variant effect prediction by passing through conv model). Evaluation protocol using allelic imbalance info from digital genomic footprinting DNAase-seq data on ENCODE cell lines. The pipeline identified allelically imbalanced SNPs (variants) from 35 cell types. We used these as the standards for evaluating DHS prediction in DeepSEA.
Model really understands on nucleotide-level: accurate predictions of DHS classifier even when trained only on reference genome, not variant data. I.e. high-confidence predictions of chromatin effect of genomic variants on the basis of genomic sequence alone. And prediction of effect of indiv SNPs on TF binding. (chromatin effect and TF binding are 2 different features)
Extend to prioritize functional SNPs on basis of predicted chromatin effect signals (objectives)
DeepSEA data etc
ENCODE and Roadmap epigenomics data releases. Chromatin profile files (see supp table 1)
200-bp bins. For each bin, label 919 chromatin features. Label 1 if more than half of the bin is in the peak region (which is determined by sampling), and 0 otherwise. For sequence->feature, only care about bins with at least one TF binding event.
But the training samples are 1000-bp sequences centered around the bins.
Valid set: 4000 samples on chromosome 7. Test set: chromosomes 8 and 9
Hm how does gkm-SVM actually work? What's a kernel?
Saturated mutagenesis for analyzing predictive sequence qualities. Assess the effect of mutating every base of input sequence (3000 substitutions per 1000-bp sequence) on chromatin feature predictions. Effect of base substitution log odds.
Evaulation of single-nucleotide sensitivity of chromatin-feature prediction. ENCODE DGF data.  A pipeline to find allelic imbalance (Fisher's exact test). Are we planning to do this??
What, truly, is functional SNP prioritization?
Feed 2 sequences through model, one with reference, one with alternative. Take log odds. Compare to... something. (and compare performance to CADD, GWAVA...)
4 evolutionary conservation features for the variant base position.
3 variant types: HGMD single-nucleotide substitution regulatory mutations, eQTLs, and GWAS SNPs. (how are these different?) train a logistic regression model with each one
Produce a DeepSEA functional significance score.

DanQ
CNN captures regulator motifs, RNN captures long-term dependencies. 
Deep learning does: motif discovery, variant effect prediction, gene expression inference.
Over 1200 GWAS identifying nearly 6500 SNPs in noncoding regions.
Chromatin profiling data: TF binding, DNAase I sensitivity, histone-mark profiles. Across multiple cell types.
Same data as DeepSeA. 919 features are ChIP-seq and DNAase-seq "peak sets" from uniformly processed ENCODE and Roadmap Epigenomics data releases.
Each sample input is centered on a bin that overlaps at least one "TF binding ChIP-seeq peak". 
Also trained a log reg baseline. Uses normalized counts of k-mers of length 1-5bp as its features.
Also, functional SNP prioritization framework (same as DeepSEA, but I didn't understand it).
Positive and negative SNP sets. Positive: eQTLs from the GRASP database and noncoding trait-associated SNPs identified in GWAS studies from NHGRI. Negative: 1000 genomes project SNPs with controlled minor allele frequency distribution. Trained ensemble classifiers. Features computed same as in DeepSEA. But how does this work????
DeepBind method to turn conv kernels into motifs. Helpful for visualization!!!!! (and we could try to corroborate with LSTMviz!) Clustered motifs using RSAT matrix clustering, to confirm varied learning.
Weight initialization is known to play a crucial role. Better initialization strategy????
Btw, significant improvement in chromatin effect prediction does not immediately translate to an equally large improvement in functional variant prediction. A few hypotheses why (linkage disequilibrium).
Future directions: fully recurrent model, incorporate new datasets, other data types (methylation, nucleosome positioning, transcription). Bayesian hyperparam tuning.

Every time she uses her powers
turning invisible behind the school sign
force field at the dinner table
discovering suit
protecting the plane
above the campfire
dash, run!
force field hamster ball around dash
force shield in family reunion
field to escape from syndrome's electricity
field to protect dash from robot
stealing remote while invisible
protect family during ship explosion